---
layout: post
title: Hold a Blog on GithubPages
published_at: "2019-02-01"
updated_at: "2019-02-01"
author: Sheldon L
---

## Associate your Git with Github

- Sign up a Github account, and learn how to manipulate your account and repo.
- Install an editor which can edit `markdown`(`.md`): such as `Atom`, `VS Code`, ...
- Install `Git`, configure your account the same as your Github, and interact with github.

## Create and Configure your Github Page (Understood as Root/Master/Home)

- Create a new repo named as `YourAccountName.github.io`, **with a `README` in it**.

- Go to this repo setting, finde the botton `Choose theme`, `Select` a theme you like.

- Back to repo, you'll see a new file named `_config.yml`. Open and add new configs:

  ```markdown
  title: Your Title
  description: Your Description
  ```

- Create a file `index.md`. You can edit it. It will show as:

`
https://YourAccountName.github.io
`

- Then, you or your collaborator can clone it to devices.

## Create and Configure your Sub Project which can be shown as website (gh-pages)

- Create a new repo named as you like.

- Go to the repo, you will see a pulldown of `Branch: master`. Click it and input: `gh-pages`, and click `create new branch: gh-pages` when you finish your typing.

- Find the tag `n branch` (n may be 2) and click.

- Set `gh-pages`as default.

- Go to this repo setting, finde the `Github Pages` block, change the source option to `gh-pages`.

- Select a theme and config it as above.

- Create a file `index.md`. You can edit it. It will show as:

`
https://YourAccountName.github.io/ProjectName
`

- Then, you or your collaborator can clone it to devices.

## How to Publish Blog

- `gh-pages` use `Jekyll` (but not full), you can search github pages documentation to get help.

- A lazy way to run gh-pages:

  - You can set `settings` in your ghpages, choose a theme, then run `git pull`.

  - You can create your blog in file `_post/yyyy-mm-dd-Your_Title_Like_This.md`

  - At the top of the blog, you should write in `yaml` language like this:

  ```yaml
  ---
  layout: post
  title: Your Title
  author: Your Name
  ---

  <!-- Here is your content writen in `markdown` -->
  <!-- Search 'Markdown tutorial' in the google, if you don't know how to write markdown -->
  ```

## Advanced (Not reccomended for beginers)

- [Deploy Jekyll pages using Git and Travis CI](https://github.com/felixrieseberg/travis-jekyll-git)
- [Tutorial - Integrating Jekyll and Travis CI](https://tonyzhangnd.github.io/2018/06/Integrating-Jekyll-and-Travis-CI.html)
