---
layout: post
title: OSS 1 - A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
published_at: "2020-05-01"
updated_at: "2020-05-01"
author: Taners
tags: [Linux, printer]
---

## Introduction

### OSS vs Proprietary

- OSS:

  - Use of OSS means source code is made available with a license which provides rights to examine, modify and redistribute, without restriction on the user's identity or purpose.

  - There is a multiplicity of licensing methods, falling into the two general classifications:

    - Permissive (such as BSD-licensed software)
    - Restrictive (such as GPL-licensed software)

- Proprietary:

  - Only the owners of such software projects have full legal access to the source code involved, although they may grant inspection rights to trusted partners who have signed non-disclosure agreements (NDAs).

  - The owners of proprietary software projects may or may not be the authors of the code; usually, the authors have been working under contracts giving up their individual rights. Indeed, many such programs are no longer even owned by their originators, but have been passed on through sales over time.

  - To use proprietary software, end users must accept a license restricting their rights, often through a confusing click-through box presented after a very long and dense description during install.

  - Such licenses generally restrict the user’s rights of re-distribution, indemnify the product from damages due to either malfunction or misuse, and prohibit trying to reconstruct source code or use inside another product. They may sometimes restrict how a product is used, but whether such restrictions are legal will vary with details and legal jurisdictions, including country.

  - Price is not the point!
    - The difference with OSS and proprietary models has nothing to do with price. One can charge as much as one wants for an open product and one can provide a proprietary product for free. *The license differences have to do with redistribution, modification, reuse of code, etc.*

### History of Open Source Software

- The 1950s and Earlier
  - Software arose from researchers, both academic and corporate
  - Distributed openly and cooperatively
  - Source always distributed, binaries less often
  - Software not seen as separate commodity
  - Software bundled for free with hardware
  - Licensing was sloppy

- The 1960s
  - Major aspects of computer science and software rapidly developed both in academia (MIT, UC Berkeley) and industrial research labs (Bell Labs, Xerox)
  - 1968: ARPANET emerges, eventually leads to Internet, essential for developers and researchers to communicate, share, collaborate
  - 1969: UNIX given birth at Bell Labs (AT&T) and given for free to universities and research centers
  - 1969: IBM forced by US government to break software and hardware apart and sell/distribute separately, due to unfair business practices.

- The 1970s
  - 1976: emacs released by *Richard Stallman* and *Guy Steele*. Versions by other authors proliferate, including proprietary ones. GNU emacs not released until 1985
  - 1978: First version of TeX released by Donald Knuth, an open source typesetting system often used for publishing journal articles and books, still in widespread use, usually in the LaTeX version.

- The 1980s
  - 1980: `Usenet` begins as the ancestor of user forums and the World Wide Web
  - 1982: `GNU` project announced by *Richard Stallman*
  - 1984: X Window System released out of MIT, with `X11` protocol released in 1987 (now run by X.Org)
  - 1985: Free Software Foundation (FSF) founded by *Richard Stallman*
  - 1987: `gcc` released (now known as Gnu Compiler Collection)
  - 1987: `Perl` released by Larry Wall.

- The 1990s
  - 1991: Linux begun by *Linus Torvalds*
  - 1992: Python released by *Guido Van Rossum*
  - 1992: 386BSD released
  - 1992: Samba developed by *Andrew Tridgell* in Australia
  - 1993: Debian first released by *Ian Murdock* and still survives as the largest non-commercial Linux distribution
  - 1993: Red Hat is founded; while earlier commercial Linux distributions already existed, Red Hat was the first company built on open source to become very large
  - 1993: NetBSD released as a fork from 386BSD
  - 1993: FreeBSD released
  - 1993: Wine released to run Windows applications on Linux
  - 1994: MySQL development begins in Sweden, first release in 1995
  - 1995: PHP, GIMP, and Ruby released
  - 1996: Apache web server released
  - 1996: KDE released
  - 1997: GNOME released
  - 1998: Netscape open sources its browser, which will later become Firefox
  - 1999: OpenOffice released (eventually forks into LibreOffice).

- The 2000s
  - 2000: LLVM compiler project begun at UI-Champaign
  - 2002: Blender released as an open source project
  - 2003: Firefox released
  - 2004: Ubuntu releases its first version, which Canonical builds on top of Debian
  - 2005: Git released by Linus *Torvalds*
  - 2007: Android released, based on Linux kernel; first devices on the market in 2008
  - 2008: Chromium released by Google; basis of Google Chrome.

- The 2010s, OSS becomes ubiquitous, dominating the smartphone market, supercomputing, worldwide networking infrastructure, etc.

### Open Source Governance Models

- Company-Led (mostly, a closed process)
  - Development is strongly led by one corporate or organizational interest
  - One entity controls software design and releases
  - May or may not solicit contributions, patches, suggestions, etc.
  - Internal discussions and controversies may not be aired very much
  - It is not definitively known what will be in the next software release
  - Upon release, all software is completely in the open
  - Examples: Google Android, Red Hat Enterprise Linux

- Benevolent Dictatorship (strong leadership)
  - One individual has overriding influence in every decision
  - Project's quality depends on that of the dictator
  - Can avoid endless discussions and lead to quicker pace
  - As project grows, success depends critically on the dictator's ability to:
    - Handle many contributors
    - Use a sane, scalable version control system
    - Appoint and work with subsystem maintainers
  - The dictator's role may be social and political, not structural (forks can occur at any time)
  - Maintainers write less and less code as projects mature
  - Example: Linux kernel

- Governing Board (tighter control by smaller groups)
  - A body (group) carries out discussions on open mailing lists
  - Decisions about design and release dates are made collectively
  - Decisions about who can contribute, and how patches and new software are accepted, are made by the governing body
  - There is much variation in governing structures, rules of organization, degree of consensus required, etc.
  - Tends to release less frequent, but hopefully well-debugged versions
  - Examples: FreeBSD, Debian.
