---
layout: post
title: Linux 16 - Local Security Principles on Linux
published_at: "2020-05-01"
updated_at: "2020-05-01"
author: Sheldon L
tags: [Linux, printer]
---

## User Accounts

- For each user, the following seven fields are maintained in the `/etc/passwd` file:

  Field Name | Details | Remarks
  -|-|-
  Username | User login name | Should be between 1 and 32 characters long
  Password | User password, the character x is stored in the `/etc/shadow` file in encrypted format  | Is never shown in Linux when it is being typed; this stops prying eyes
  User ID (UID) | Every user must have a user id (UID) | UID 0 is reserved for root, 1-99 are reserved for other predefined accounts, 100-999 are reserved for system accounts and groups, Normal users have UID's of 1000 or greater
  Group ID (GID) | The primary Group ID (GID); stored in the `/etc/group` file | [Linux 9 - Basics of Linux](https://www.sheldonl.com/2019/11/09/00.html): Managing Processes; [Linux 13 - Users, Environment and Permissions in Linux](https://www.sheldonl.com/2020/04/29/00.html)
  User Info | This field is optional and allows insertion of extra information about the user such as their name | For example: Rufus T. Firefly
  Home Directory | The absolute path location of user's home directory | For example: /home/rtfirefly
  Shell | The absolute location of a user's default shell | For example: /bin/bash

  - See `/etc/login.def`

- By default, Linux distinguishes between several account types in order to isolate processes and workloads. Linux has four types of accounts:

  - root
  - System
  - Normal
  - Network

- The `last` utility, which shows the last time each user logged into the system, can be used to help identify potentially inactive accounts which are candidates for system removal.

### Understanding the root Account

- `root` is the most privileged account on a Linux/UNIX system. This account has the ability to carry out all facets of system administration, including adding accounts, changing user passwords, examining log files, installing software, etc. It has no security restrictions imposed upon it.

- When you are signed in as, or acting as root, the shell prompt displays '#' (if you are using bash and you have not customized the prompt, as we have discussed previously). This convention is intended to serve as a warning to you of the absolute power of this account.

- root privileges are required to perform operations such as:

  - Creating, removing and managing user accounts
  - Managing software packages
  - Removing or modifying system files
  - Restarting system services.

### Operations Not Requiring root Privileges

- A regular account user can perform some operations requiring special permissions; however, the system configuration must allow such abilities to be exercised.

- `SUID` (Set owner User ID upon execution - similar to the Windows "run as" feature) is a special kind of file permission given to a file. Use of SUID provides temporary permissions to a user to run a program with the permissions of the file `owner` (which may be root) instead of the permissions held by the `user`.

Operations that do not require Root privilege | Examples of this operation
-|-
Running a network client | Sharing a file over the network
Using devices such as printers | Printing over the network
Operations on files that the user has proper permissions to access | Accessing files that you have access to or sharing data over the network
Running SUID-root applications | Executing programs such as passwd

### Comparing sudo and su

`su` | `sudo`
-|-
When elevating privilege, you need to enter the root password. Giving the root password to a normal user should never, ever be done. | When elevating privilege, you need to enter the user’s password and not the root password.
Once a user elevates to the root account using su, the user can do anything that the root user can do for as long as the user wants, without being asked again for a password. | Offers more features and is considered more secure and more configurable. Exactly what the user is allowed to do can be precisely controlled and limited. By default the user will either always have to keep giving their password to do further operations with sudo, or can avoid doing so for a configurable time interval.
The command has limited logging features. | The command has detailed logging features.

### `sudo`

- `sudo` has the ability to keep track of unsuccessful attempts at gaining root access. Users' authorization for using `sudo` is based on configuration information stored in the `/etc/sudoers` file and in the `/etc/sudoers.d` directory.

- Whenever `sudo` is invoked, a trigger will look at `/etc/sudoers` and the files in `/etc/sudoers.d` to determine if the user has the right to use sudo and what the scope of their privilege is. Unknown user requests and requests to do operations not allowed to the user even with sudo are reported. The basic structure of entries in these files is `who where = (as_whom) what`

  - `/etc/sudoers` contains a lot of documentation in it about how to customize. Most Linux distributions now prefer you add a file in the directory `/etc/sudoers.d` with a name the same as the user.

  - You should edit any of these configuration files by using `visudo`, which ensures that only one person is editing the file at a time, has the proper permissions, and refuses to write out the file and exit if there are syntax errors in the changes made. The editing can be accomplished by doing a command such as the following ones:

  ```bash
  visudo /etc/sudoers
  visudo -f /etc/sudoers.d/student
  ```

- By default, sudo commands and any failures are logged in `/var/log/auth.log` under the Debian distribution family, and in `/var/log/messages` and/or `/var/log/secure` on other systems. This is an important safeguard to allow for tracking and accountability of sudo use. A typical entry of the message contains:

  - Calling username
  - Terminal info
  - Working directory
  - User account invoked
  - Command with arguments.

```bash
sudo whoami
cat /var/log/auth.log | grep whoami
# Dec 8 14:20:47 server1 sudo: op : TTY=pts/6 PWD=/var/log USER=root COMMAND=/usr/bin/whoami
```

### Process Isolation

- Linux is considered to be more secure than many other operating systems because processes are naturally isolated from each other. One process normally cannot access the resources of another process, even when that process is running with the same user privileges. Linux thus makes it difficult (though certainly not impossible) for viruses and security exploits to access and attack random resources on a system.

- More recent additional security mechanisms that limit risks even further include:

  - Control Groups (`cgroups`)
  - Allows system administrators to group processes and associate finite resources to each `cgroup`.
  - `Containers`
  - Makes it possible to run multiple isolated Linux systems (`containers`) on a single system by relying on `cgroups`.
  - Virtualization
  - Hardware is emulated in such a way that not only processes can be isolated, but entire systems are run simultaneously as isolated and insulated guests (`virtual machines`) on one physical host.

### Hardware Device Access

- Linux limits user access to non-networking hardware devices in a manner that is extremely similar to regular file access. Applications interact by engaging the `filesystem` layer (which is independent of the actual device or hardware the file resides on). This layer will then open a device special file (often called a `device node`) under the `/dev` directory that corresponds to the device being accessed. Each device special file has standard owner, group and world permission fields. Security is naturally enforced just as it is when standard files are accessed.

- Hard disks, for example, are represented as `/dev/sd*`. While a root user can read and write to the disk in a raw fashion, for example, by doing something like `echo hello world > /dev/sda1`

- The normal reading and writing of files on the hard disk by applications is done at a higher level through the filesystem, and never through direct access to the `device node`.

### Keeping Current

- When security problems in either the Linux kernel or applications and libraries are discovered, Linux distributions have a good record of reacting quickly and pushing out fixes to all systems by updating their software repositories and sending notifications to update immediately. The same thing is true with bug fixes and performance improvements that are not security related. So the best practice is to take advantage of your Linux distribution's mechanism for automatic updates and never postpone them. It is extremely rare that such an update will cause new problems.

## Working with passwords

### How Passwords Are Stored

- Originally, encrypted passwords were stored in the `/etc/passwd` file, which was readable by everyone. This made it rather easy for passwords to be cracked.

- On modern systems, passwords are actually stored in an encrypted format in a secondary file named `/etc/shadow`. Only those with root access can read or modify this file.

### Password Algorithm

- Protecting passwords has become a crucial element of security. Most Linux distributions rely on a modern password encryption algorithm called SHA-512 (Secure Hashing Algorithm 512 bits), developed by the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) to encrypt passwords.

- The SHA-512 algorithm is widely used for security applications and protocols. These security applications and protocols include TLS, SSL, PHP, SSH, S/MIME and IPSec. SHA-512 is one of the most tested hashing algorithms.

```bash
echo -n string | sha512sum
```

### Good Password Practices

- **Password aging** is a method to ensure that users get prompts that remind them to create a new password after a specific period. This can ensure that passwords, if cracked, will only be usable for a limited amount of time. This feature is implemented using `chage`, which configures the password expiry information for a user.

```bash
chage --list [user]
sudo chage -E 2014-31-12 [user]
```

- Another method is to force users to set strong passwords using Pluggable Authentication Modules (`PAM`). `PAM` can be configured to automatically verify that a password created or modified using the `passwd` utility is sufficiently strong. PAM configuration is implemented using a library called [`pam_cracklib.so`](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/en/man8/pam_cracklib.8.html), which can also be replaced by [`pam_passwdqc.so`](http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/en/man8/pam_passwdqc.8.html) to take advantage of more options.

- One can also install **password cracking programs**, such as [John The Ripper](http://www.openwall.com/john/), to secure the password file and detect weak password entries. *It is recommended that written authorization be obtained before installing such tools on any system that you do not own*.
